


=pod

=head1 NAME

imap_ssl_cert - connects to an IMAP server using SSL and saves the server certificate into a .pem file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 imap_ssl_cert -H imap.server.com > server_ca_file.pem
 imap_ssl_cert -?
 imap_ssl_cert --help

=head1 DEPENDENCIES

This utility requires the following perl modules to be installed:

Getopt::Long
Mail::IMAPClient
IO::Socket::SSL
Net::SSLeay

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item --timeout <seconds>

Abort with critical status if it takes longer than <seconds> to connect to the IMAP server. Default is 60 seconds.
The difference between timeout and critical is that, with the default settings, if it takes 45 seconds to 
connect to the server then the connection will succeed but the plugin will return CRITICAL because it took longer
than 30 seconds.
Also known as: -t <seconds> 

=item --hostname <server>

Address or name of the IMAP server. Examples: mail.server.com, localhost, 192.168.1.100
Also known as: -H <server>

=item --port <number>

Service port on the IMAP server. Default is 143. If you use SSL, default is 993.
Also known as: -p <number>

=item --verbose

Display additional information. Useful for troubleshooting. 

Also known as: -v

=item --version

Display plugin version and exit.
Also known as: -V

=item --help

Display this documentation and exit.
Also known as: -h

=item --usage

Display a short usage instruction and exit. 

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Print the server's SSL certificate chain

 $ perl imap_ssl_cert.pl -H imap.server.com > ca_file.pem
 $ cat ca_file.pem

 -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
 MIID1zCCAr+gAwIBAgIQPr3bVk0SkuXygjxgA7EVGDANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQUFADA8
 [...snip...]
 0FF4warjskrfqaVtWeIV58LJheaM4cPJkc2M
 -----END CERTIFICATE-----

 $ openssl x509 -in ca_file.pem -text


=head1 SEE ALSO

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X.509
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privacy_Enhanced_Mail
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1422
http://search.cpan.org/~mikem/Net-SSLeay-1.42/lib/Net/SSLeay.pm
http://search.cpan.org/~plobbes/Mail-IMAPClient-3.29/lib/Mail/IMAPClient.pod

=head1 CHANGES

 Fri Nov 11 03:38:13 AST 2011
 + version 0.1

=head1 AUTHOR

Jonathan Buhacoff <jonathan@buhacoff.net>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

 Copyright (C) 2011 Jonathan Buhacoff

 This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
 it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
 the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
 (at your option) any later version.

 This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
 but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
 MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
 GNU General Public License for more details.

 You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
 along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

 http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.txt

=cut

